[AUDIO LOGO]
[PEACEFUL MUSIC]
>> Where ancient wisdom and
modern research converge,
"Divine Science" emerges.
Imagine a world where every
plant, from the towering trees
to the most delicate
of flowers, contains
a secret language of awareness.
And what if, within
their silent whispers,
lies knowledge and connection
waiting to be unearthed?
Is it possible that the
plant world around us
thrives as a silent form
of awareness, a living
psyche, as many ancient
cultures once believed,
and that they harbored
consciousness yet
to be fully understood?
[MYSTERIOUS MUSIC]
>> There's a raging debate
happening in the scientific
community around the
consciousness of plants.
Already the word
"intelligence" alone,
when we talk about
plants, it scares
people, the idea that plants
are intelligent beings.
And then when you move
forward to consciousness,
the human neurobiology
world wants
you to believe
that consciousness
is something that is completely
relegated to the brain.
But we know that there's
multiple theories
of consciousness.
And so the other side
of the debate says,
no, plants are conscious because
they are aware of themselves.
They can take in
multiple pieces of input
and then make decisions on
that input, in other words,
adapt or accept or
transform or change,
based on what's happening.
So the idea that they
have a self-awareness
is really, to me, the
core of consciousness.
>> In the past couple of years,
you've seen not only mainstream
science admit that consciousness
is not an illusion that can be
waved away, but even finally go
so far as to say that animals
possess consciousness.
There was a great declaration
that many scientists
signed that said animals
have consciousness.
It's like, OK,
welcome to the party.
There's no reason why it
stops from humans to animals
and does not continue on
into other life forms,
including plants.
In fact, I don't think you
would find a serious researcher
of consciousness
who would completely
exclude the idea that plants
themselves are not conscious.
Consciousness, in
other words, seems
to be attendant to
all biological life.
It reproduces.
It's reactive to
its environment.
Plants have a kind of
decision making ability,
meaning they will decide to
move more towards the sun
or more towards the
shade or whatever
it is that's the
balance that it likes.
[UPBEAT MUSIC]
>> An intriguing theory
often debated in the realms
of science suggests that water
has the capacity to store
information.
If this life-giving
element is the essence
of all conscious
beings on Earth,
from thriving jungles
to blossoming meadows,
could it be that plants
nourished by this water
are custodians of ancient wisdom
and perhaps even the secrets
of humanity's very existence?
>> I think that it's actually
water that is the driving force
of all nature.
I think Leonardo
da Vinci said that.
I actually think that when
we're looking at life beings--
plants, animals,
fungi, all of it--
the information exchange
is through the water
because nothing is
alive without it.
There is no life without water.
When it comes to
plants, the roots
are what's picking up the
information of the fluids
within the Earth.
So we often don't think
about that, that there would
be water, really, in the earth.
We tend not to think about it.
But if there wasn't any,
the plants wouldn't survive.
And when they're taking
water up through their roots,
it's also reading
the information
of their surroundings.
>> It could be that the plants
are responding to and signaling
to its external environment, to
the nature that surrounds it,
in the same way that humans
are, meaning the operation
of the microtubules or
connecting its cellular
intelligence to the quantum
field, is how consciousness is,
in some sense, animating
the body of the plant.
There's even some speculation
that plants might have memory.
There's a particular
type of plant
that will react to
it being touched.
So for example, if you
touch it, it will close up.
But if you keep touching it, it
will just become non-responsive
because it's somehow
learned that your touch is
inconsequential.
It's become habituated.
>> The Princeton Engineering
Anomalies Research Lab delved
into groundbreaking experiments
from the late 1970s to 2007.
Using a random number
generator, they
aim to measure the
impact of consciousness
on physical matter.
>> We had this room
with no windows in it.
And we had a plant that
required sunlight to live.
And we put it in one
corner of the room.
And in the very center of the
room, we had a growing light.
And that growing
light was connected
to a motor that
would allow the light
to shine only in one of the four
corners in the room at a time.
And the direction, the corner
on which the light shone,
was controlled by this
random number generator,
meaning that it's totally random
and unpredictable in which
direction this light
is going to shine.
We left this for about 10 days.
And we were recording the
direction in which the light
was shining, which corner.
The light should be
shining in each corner
about 25% of the time.
But what we found that the
light was shining on the corner
that the plant was in
over 35% of the time.
Now, that's a very
stark difference
between the outcome and the
theoretical distribution.
It suggests that the plant
itself maybe has an intention.
It has an intention
to do what it
needs to do to bring those
survival elements toward it,
including affecting
the random number
generator such that
the light shines on it
more often than it should.
This crazy experiment
where the plant
seems to influence the
light to shine on it
reveals what life itself
is inclined to do.
Life seems to bend
the world around it
to provide what it needs for
its survival and its growth.
Of course, we don't know how
a plant would possibly affect
a random number generator.
If a plant is
alive, which it is,
and if it has consciousness,
which it seems to,
then the fact that
it has consciousness
means that it's connected
to the field that
connects all life, that
connects all things, not just
life to life, but
life to electron,
in the case of the
random number generator.
>> When we're talking about
decision making in plants,
we're really talking about, do
plants react to situations with
an innate program?
Some genotypic, something
that's coded into their genes?
There's a Pavlov's
dog type of study.
We trained a dog that
when they hear the bell,
they start to salivate
because the bell has
been associated with food.
This type of experiment was
carried out by a researcher
by the name of Monica Gagliano.
So what she did was she put pea
plants into a sort of Y tube.
And in this Y tube, she
had the plants growing.
And she associated
the sound of a fan
with the idea of sunlight,
then at some point
removed that light.
And what she found was
the plants deviated
from their normal, this
is where the sunlight
is, and grew towards
the fan noise,
saying that plants actually
made a decision to associate
themselves to the fan noise
rather than to other things.
So this is one of the
various types of examples
of studies that are starting to
get carried out right now that
starts to show as
agency, the idea
that plants are
capable of taking
in multiple types of input
and then choosing which path
that they are going to take.
The problem is not the
plants communicating with us.
The problem is human beings
listening to the plants,
because once we start
to recognize plants
as persons with personality,
our entire world changes.
The clothing you wear
is made from a plant.
The chair I'm sitting
on is wood from a plant.
The food I eat is a plant.
How much do I need in order
to live a fulfilled life
while still giving
back to the plant?
And how do I recognize
their sacrifices
for us, what they give
in order for us to live?
[PIANO MUSIC]
>> In the endeavor to understand
the unique language of plants
and appreciate their complex,
subtle forms of interaction,
it becomes clear that
their anatomy and modes
of communication are vastly
different from those of humans.
Just as the human brain guides
actions and perceptions,
plants possess their own
unique centers of intelligence.
>> We look at our brain
as on the surface value.
But if we look for the
brain of the plants,
you will find it mostly
in the soil and the roots.
And the other aspects
are the expression.
So they communicate with each
other, either through the roots
or through different
interactions with the wind,
with the pollen, with
the different animals
that interact with them, the
pollenization from the bees.
This is like a
dynamic, living entity
that is not to be restricted
to an individual plant,
but to the whole ecosystem that
supports them and allows them
to interact with each other.
>> If you were to somehow
interview a bacterial cell
in your gut, and
you'd say, hey, cell,
who are you and who
do you think you are,
and do you think that maybe
there's a deeper purpose behind
your life?
And it might hazard an
answer, hypothetically.
But it would
probably never guess
that it's actually part
of a network of billions
of other bacterial cells whose
job it is to help process food
and create serotonin
for this person who
has all of these other
thoughts, feelings, ambitions,
and lives in it.
Couldn't possibly occur to
the bacteria in the belly.
And so there's this
kind of bias that we
have where we can look down
and see deeper interconnections
at levels beneath us.
But we're a little
bit blind when
it comes to seeing deeper
levels of interconnection
and holistic nature above us.
And so plants are maybe similar
in that way, where we can
look at an individual plant.
OK, it's an individual plant.
I can study its cells.
I can study how it
consumes water and sunlight
and so forth.
But you don't usually find
individual plants in nature,
do you?
You find that they
exist in an ecosystem
of other plants, other
types of species, maybe
its own family of plants.
And then deep down
at the root level,
they're very interconnected.
These might be very
large, very complex, very
interconnected superorganisms.
>> Beyond their
basic sustenance,
plants have developed
sophisticated mechanisms,
some even harnessing the unique
crystalline structures within
their roots, which resonate
with distinct sound patterns.
As scientists delve
deeper into this realm,
they're uncovering
the remarkable ways
in which plants interact and
how their intrinsic systems can
respond to external
stimuli, blurring
the lines between biology
and consciousness.
>> There's a whole science
of communication with plants
recognizing that in the
root structure of plants,
there is what is called the
piezoelectric effect of how
the crystalline structure of
the roots of the plants can be
modulated by certain
sound patterns.
This is called
quickening or activating
the ATP, the adenosine
triphosphate,
within the plant itself.
It is clear that plants, like
humans, have a cosmic antenna.
And the idea is if you send the
sound patterns from satellites
to Earth, you can activate
thousands of acres of plants
at the same time where you can
increase organic production
to volumes of 30% to 50%.
This has been done in
Indonesia in other parts
of the world of how agricultural
production and musical sound
patterns produced through
satellite electronics
can bring about the
needed food reserves
we need for a growing
world population.
[CHIME MUSIC]
>> Since the 1970s, the Damanhur
community and research facility
in Italy have been engaged in a
pioneering project called Music
of the Plants.
Utilizing bioelectroacoustic
technology,
they have converted
the electrical signals
emitted by plants into
audible frequencies.
This groundbreaking work
provides compelling evidence
suggesting that plants possess
their own distinctive voice
and communication modalities.
>> Plants use electricity
in their body.
And so many years
ago, we thought,
why don't we create a device
that allows us to record
this electrical signal?
Electrical signals
are frequencies.
Frequency is sound.
And maybe we could do
something with this.
This device is basically a
musical instrument for plants.
It allows the plants to
create the notes of music,
to choose the frequencies
that they want in order
to be able to make
melody and make sounds.
>> The way the Music of the
Plants works is there is
an alligator clip that
is connected to a leaf.
And it collects the electrical
frequency of the plant.
Then there is a grounding
prod that goes into the soil.
And that grounding prod picks
up the electrical frequency
of the root system.
And between the two of them,
it completes a frequency
and collects a complete
frequency of the plants.
And then that frequency is sent
into the Music of the Plants
box, because the box is
a biofeedback system.
So that frequency goes into
the biofeedback system,
who then sends it to a
built-in midi synthesizer
and translates that frequency
that it has collected
from the plant into sound.
And then the sound is
sent back to the plant.
So ultimately, in
layman's terms,
the simplest way
to understand this
is the Music of the
Plants' equipment
becomes a musical
instrument, and the plant
becomes the musician.
[CHIME MUSIC]
>> So this device, the
importance of it is the fact
that we tend to think
of music as a language.
But the truth of the
matter is that language
is a form of musicality.
And so the Music of
the Plants is a device
that gives us the opportunity
to level the playing field,
to open a dialogue
of conversation
with plants and humans
using that basic form
of communication
between the two of us.
And here at Damanhur, we've
done so many different types
of studies with the
Music of the Plants.
We have had concerts
where we see
interspecies music and the
ability for us to experiment
and listen to what happens
when humans and plants start
to dialogue through sound.
But we've also tested out
the effects of plant music
on human health.
So I carried out a
study that allowed
us to see what were the
effects of having healing
sessions with plants
and what changes
to some of the
different diseases
that we were testing for--
diabetes or hypertension
or thyroidism.
And there's also been
many other studies
that have happened around
the world around the Music
of the Plants where
people have looked
into things like blood thickness
and blood consistency, plasma
levels.
People have looked
into healing from comas
and physical therapy.
So we are seeing
that the plants are
able to use the music in
order to enhance their healing
ability with human beings.
And this is most likely because
we have sound healing [GONG]
combined with plants.
And all their healing abilities
that are merging together
with this device.
>> Beyond the technological
innovations that transform
the subtle harmonics of plant
life into an audible symphony,
a deeper question emerges.
How does this auditory bridge
between plant and human worlds
redefine our understanding of
interspecies communication?
And are we perhaps on the
threshold of a new realm
of shared consciousness?
>> I've been working with
the plant music for 16 years.
And I've been researching
it for 10 years.
And in my experience,
what we've discovered
is that the plants
have this divine way
of being able to connect
to the human energy field
and know exactly what we
need when we need it, and are
able to somehow transfer
that knowledge, that benefit,
that healing, whatever term
you want to use, to the human
through the sound.
And my research has not been
able to support this yet.
But I do have a hypothesis that
there is something more coming
through the music than
just the sound that
gets sent into the
skin of the body that
is contributing to this.
>> The relationship between
plants and humans reveals
a profound interplay of
mind, body, and nature,
where intentions in sound
show tangible effects.
Studies on chanting Vedic
mantras to plants in India
illustrate that this bond goes
beyond physicality, delving
into a realm shaped by
emotion and intention.
>> The crops that have been
chanted to with the Vedic
sounds, they flourish more.
And then their fruits or their
products are more healthy.
And people feel the effects.
It could be said to
be psychological.
But that's an important part.
Psychological is also
important, in knowing
that there is this relationship
of love and support
through the plants.
We feel that the best
cook is from the heart.
It's not just those
who mix ingredients.
But when a mother
or a father prepares
the food with true love, there
is an additional value there.
And so that value
carries on from the plant
as a plant in nature
to the plant's presence
on your table to eat it.
And there is this
deep relationship
between mind, body,
and sound and melody
that creates a
wholeness which is
more than the sum of its parts.
[ORCHESTRAL MUSIC]
>> The most consequential study
that I have done is the one I
did in 2018 with a lab out
of Encinitas, California,
called Psy-Tek Labs.
And what we discovered there
is that plant music has
the potential to do what
medicine is designed to do,
which means stop what's
going on in the body
or disrupt it and
then allow the body
to rebuild itself into
a healthier state.
[CHIME MUSIC]
That's exactly what the
plant music has done.
It does that with the music.
The way we tested
this was by using
GDV, which is a gas
discharge visualization
piece of equipment, which is
similar to Kirlian photography.
And it was able to show us the
stress level in the organs.
It was able to
show us the energy
fields, the physical
of energy field,
the psychological and
emotional energy field.
And we were able to see that
the energy fields actually
got worse three hours
after the people were
listening to the music.
And then six hours
later, it got worse.
And then 24 hours later,
it was 100% better
than it was when
the person started
listening to the plant music.
So that's how we were
able to determine that.
>> Reflecting upon insights into
plants as sentient beings with
healing capabilities challenges
us to contemplate their role
in the evolutionary
saga of life itself,
a journey entwined with
survival, understanding,
and harmonious coexistence.
>> Plants are our
brothers and sisters.
Plants represent one part of
the geological and biological
pattern of life
that we must learn
from if we are going to
survive biospheric collapse.
This is the time
that the ancestry
of the plant kingdom
and the human kingdom
converge with a common story.
>> The one takeaway I would
want people to get from
the consciousness of plants
and the understanding is that
nature has a consciousness.
All of nature does.
And it's there waiting
for us to open up,
to receive what it
has to provide us.
And that's exactly what
nature does for us,
just waiting for us
to open up to receive
what it has to give us.
And it can do so much for us
and help us in so many ways.
>> You can look at a
forest and you can see that
there's an intelligence in the
way that the forest is laid
out.
There's an ecosystem
where the plants
are supporting themselves.
Anything that is coherent
and coordinated like that
has an intelligence.
And that intelligence,
as far as we can tell,
is synonymous with
consciousness.
Nature has such an
incredible intelligence.
And we ought to remain its
students, not its masters.
And plants themselves
have a unique ability
to teach us these lessons.
>> What is the completeness
or the next level of evolution
for the human being?
And I feel like a deep
connection with plants,
the different logic
that plants have,
opening ourselves up to
our creativity to receive,
gives us the opportunity to
evolve humanity in harmony
once again with plants.
[UPBEAT MUSIC]
>> Plants, in their
silent existence,
indeed possess a language
of awareness echoing ancient
beliefs of a living
psyche in nature.
This journey to a
newfound understanding
opens us to a deeper
communion with life
where every leaf and bloom holds
a whisper of the universe's
secrets, leading us to
a profound appreciation
of the consciousness of plants
and our relationship to them.
Join us for more episodes
on "Divine Science," where
we continue exploring the
crossroads of modern research
and ancient wisdom.